On 8 August 1967 five leaders Foreign Ministers Indonesia Malaysia
Philippines Singapore Thailand sat down together main hall Department
Foreign Affairs building Bangkok Thailand signed document virtue document
Association Southeast Asian Nations ASEAN born five Foreign Ministers who
signed Adam Malik Indonesia Narciso Ramos Philippines Tun Abdul Razak
Malaysia Rajaratnam Singapore Thanat Khoman Thailand subsequently hailed
Founding Fathers probably most successful intergovernmental organization
developing world today document signed known ASEAN Declaration short
simply worded document containing just five articles declared
establishment an Association Regional Cooperation among Countries
Southeast Asia known Association Southeast Asian Nations ASEAN spelled out
aims purposes Association These aims purposes were about cooperation
economic social cultural technical educational other fields promotion
regional peace stability through abiding respect justice rule law
adherence principles United Nations Charter stipulated Association open
participation States Southeast Asian region subscribing aims principles
purposes proclaimed ASEAN representing collective will nations Southeast
Asia bind themselves together friendship cooperation through joint efforts
sacrifices secure their peoples posterity blessings peace freedom
prosperity while Thailand brokering reconciliation among Indonesia
Philippines Malaysia over certain disputes dawned four countries moment
regional cooperation come or future region remain uncertain Recalls two
surviving protagonists historic process Thanat Khoman Thailand banquet
marking reconciliation between three disputants broached idea forming
another organization regional cooperation with Adam Malik Malik agreed
without hesitation asked time talk with his government also normalize
relations with Malaysia now confrontation over Meanwhile Thai Foreign
Office prepared draft charter institution Within few months everything
ready therefore invited two former members Association Southeast Asia ASA
Malaysia Philippines Indonesia key member meeting Bangkok addition
Singapore sent Rajaratnam Foreign Minister see me about joining setup
Although organization planned comprise only ASA members plus Indonesia
Singapore’s request favorably considered so early August 1967 five Foreign
Ministers spent four days relative isolation beach resort Bang Saen
coastal town less than hundred kilometers southeast Bangkok There
negotiated over document decidedly informal manner which later delight
describing sports shirt diplomacy Yet no means an easy process each man
brought into deliberations historical political perspective no resemblance
any others with goodwill good humor often huddled negotiating table
finessed their way through their differences lined up their shots golf
course traded wisecracks another’s game style deliberation which
eventually become ASEAN ministerial tradition Now with rigors negotiations
informalities Bang Saen behind them with their signatures neatly attached
ASEAN Declaration also known Bangkok Declaration time some formalities
first speak Philippine Secretary Foreign Affairs Narciso Ramos time
journalist long time legislator who given up chance Speaker Philippine
Congress serve his country’s first diplomats He 66 years old his only son
future President Fidel Ramos serving with Philippine Civic Action Group
embattled Vietnam He recalled tediousness negotiations preceded signing
Declaration truly taxed goodwill imagination patience understanding five
participating Ministers ASEAN established spite these difficulties he said
meant foundations been solidly laid he impressed audience diplomats
officials media people who witnessed signing ceremony great sense urgency
prompted Ministers go through trouble He spoke darkly forces were arrayed
against survival countries Southeast Asia those uncertain critical times
fragmented economies Southeast Asia he said with each country pursuing own
limited objectives dissipating meager resources overlapping or even
conflicting endeavors sister states carry seeds weakness their incapacity
growth their self perpetuating dependence advanced industrial nations
ASEAN therefore could marshal still untapped potentials this rich region
through more substantial united action When his turn speak Adam Malik
Presidium Minister Political Affairs Minister Foreign Affairs Indonesia
recalled about year before Bangkok conclusion peace talks between
Indonesia Malaysia he explored idea an organization such ASEAN with his
Malaysian Thai counterparts angry young men his country’s struggle
independence two decades earlier Adam Malik 50 years old Presidium five
led General Soeharto steering Indonesia from verge economic political
chaos He Presidium’s point man Indonesia’s efforts mend fences with
neighbors wake an unfortunate policy confrontation During past year he
said Ministers worked together toward realization ASEAN idea making haste
slowly order build association regional cooperation Adam Malik went
describe Indonesia’s vision Southeast Asia developing into region which
can stand own feet strong enough defend itself against any negative
influence from outside region Such vision he stressed wishful thinking if
countries region effectively cooperated with each other considering their
combined natural resources manpower He referred differences outlook among
member countries those differences he said overcome through maximum
goodwill understanding faith realism Hard work patience perseverance he
added also necessary countries Southeast Asia should also willing take
responsibility whatever happens them according Tun Abdul Razak Deputy
Prime Minister Malaysia who spoke next his speech he conjured vision an
ASEAN include countries Southeast Asia Tun Abdul Razak concurrently his
country’s Minister Defence Minister National Development time when
national survival overriding thrust Malaysia’s relations with other
nations so Minister Defence he charge his country’s foreign affairs He
stressed countries region should recognize unless assumed their common
responsibility shape their own destiny prevent external intervention
interference Southeast Asia remain fraught with danger tension unless took
decisive collective action prevent eruption intra regional conflicts
nations Southeast Asia remain susceptible manipulation against another We
nations peoples Southeast Asia Tun Abdul Razak said must get together form
ourselves perspective framework region is important individually jointly
we should create deep awareness we cannot survive long independent
isolated peoples unless we also think act together unless we prove deeds
we belong family Southeast Asian nations bound together ties friendship
goodwill imbued with own ideals aspirations determined shape own destiny
He added with establishment ASEAN we taken firm bold step road his part
Rajaratnam former Minister Culture multicultural Singapore who time served
first Foreign Minister noted two decades nationalist fervor fulfilled
expectations people Southeast Asia better living standards If ASEAN
succeed he said members marry national thinking with regional thinking We
must now think two levels Rajaratnam said We must think only national
interests posit them against regional interests is way thinking about
problems these are two different things sometimes can conflict Secondly we
must also accept fact if we are really serious about regional existence
means painful adjustments those practices thinking respective countries We
must make these painful difficult adjustments If we are going do
regionalism remains utopia Rajaratnam expressed fear however ASEAN
misunderstood We are against anything he said against anybody here he used
term an ominous ring even today balkanization Southeast Asia Europe any
part world he said outside powers vested interest balkanization region We
want ensure he said stable Southeast Asia balkanized Southeast Asia those
countries who are interested genuinely interested stability Southeast Asia
prosperity Southeast Asia better economic social conditions will welcome
small countries getting together pool their collective resources their
collective wisdom contribute peace world goal ASEAN is create destroy This
Foreign Minister Thailand Thanat Khoman stressed when his turn speak time
when Vietnam conflict raging American forces seemed forever entrenched
Indochina he foreseen their eventual withdrawal from area accordingly
applied himself adjusting Thailand’s foreign policy reality only become
apparent more than half decade later He must mind when occasion he said
countries Southeast Asia no choice adjust exigencies time move toward
closer cooperation even integration Elaborating ASEAN objectives he spoke
building society will responsive needs time efficiently equipped bring
about enjoyment material well spiritual advancement peoples conditions
stability progress Particularly what millions men women part world want is
erase old obsolete concept domination subjection past replace with spirit
give take equality partnership More than anything else want master their
own house enjoy inherent right decide their own destiny While nations
Southeast Asia prevent attempts deprive them their freedom sovereignty he
said must first free themselves from material impediments ignorance
disease hunger Each these nations cannot accomplish alone joining together
cooperating with those who same aspirations these objectives become easier
attain Thanat Khoman concluded What we decided today is only small
beginning what we hope will long continuous sequence accomplishments which
we ourselves those who will join us later generations come can proud Let
Southeast Asia potentially rich region rich history spiritual well
material resources indeed whole ancient continent Asia light happiness
well being will shine over uncounted millions struggling peoples Foreign
Minister Thailand closed inaugural session Association Southeast Asian
Nations presenting each his colleagues with memento Inscribed memento
presented Foreign Minister Indonesia citation recognition services
rendered His Excellency Adam Malik ASEAN organization name which suggested
him how ASEAN conceived given name born been barely 14 months since Thanat
Khoman brought up ASEAN idea his conversations with his Malaysian
Indonesian colleagues about three more weeks Indonesia fully restore
diplomatic relations with Malaysia soon after with Singapore no means end
intra ASEAN disputes soon Philippines Malaysia falling out issue
sovereignty over Sabah Many disputes between ASEAN countries persist this
day Member Countries are deeply committed resolving their differences
through peaceful means spirit mutual accommodation Every dispute proper
season allowed get way task hand time essential task lay framework
regional dialogue cooperation two page Bangkok Declaration only contains
rationale establishment ASEAN specific objectives represents
organization’s modus operandi building small steps voluntary informal
arrangements towards more binding institutionalized agreements founding
member states newer members stood fast spirit Bangkok Declaration Over
years ASEAN has progressively entered into several formal legally binding
instruments such 1976 Treaty Amity Cooperation Southeast Asia 1995 Treaty
Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone Against backdrop conflict
Indochina Founding Fathers foresight building community Southeast Asian
states Thus Bangkok Declaration promulgated Association is open
participation States Southeast Asian region subscribing aforementioned
aims principles purposes ASEAN’s inclusive outlook has paved way community
building only Southeast Asia also broader Asia Pacific region where
several other intergovernmental organizations now coexist original ASEAN
logo presented five brown sheaves rice stalks each founding member Beneath
sheaves is legend ASEAN blue These are set field yellow encircled blue
border Brown stands strength stability yellow prosperity blue spirit
cordiality which ASEAN affairs are conducted When ASEAN celebrated 30th
Anniversary 1997 sheaves logo increased ten representing ten countries
Southeast Asia reflecting colors flags them very real sense ASEAN
Southeast Asia same just Founding Fathers envisioned This article is based
first chapter ASEAN 30 publication Association Southeast Asian Nations
commemoration 30th Anniversary 8 August 1997 written Jamil Maidan Flores
Jun Abad
